[Request][8.14] improved ES|QL investigation (highlighted) fields (#5182)
elastic/security-docs: docs/detections/rules-ui-create.asciidoc

[[esql-agg-query]]
===== Aggregating query 

> Aggregating queries use {ref}/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-agg-functions[`STATS...BY`] functions to aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a rule with an aggregating query only contain the source event fields that the {esql} query returns and new fields that the query creates.

Reviewer: Previous statement was the correct one

TIP: To improve the visibility of these fields while investigating alerts that the {esql} rule generates, add them to the rule's  <<rule-ui-advanced-params,custom highlighted fields>>. 

> NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index.

Reviewer: I would maybe add an example here.

```suggestion
NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index. For example, fields created by [eval command](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/esql-commands.html#esql-eval) or [rename](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/esql-commands.html#esql-rename)
```

Author: This is a good idea! I think one example would suffice here, and we could expand on it to like so:

```suggestion
NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-rename[`RENAME`] command to change the name of an existing field, and the renamed field doesn't exist in the query's source index, it's considered a new field. 
```
Let me know if the above is correct or if it needs to be tweaked at all.

Reviewer: Can we give here example of `EVAL` command? It might be more common use case to use `EVAL`, rather than just rename field

Author: Added to draft via [ab386a5](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/5182/commits/ab386a53c89d2672b5490a212243d7666c4d98d2).

[[esql-agg-query]]
===== Aggregating query 

> Aggregating queries use {ref}/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-agg-functions[`STATS...BY`] functions to aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a rule with an aggregating query only contain the fields that the {esql} query returns and new fields that the query creates.

Author: Works for me!

> Aggregating queries use {ref}/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-agg-functions[`STATS...BY`] functions to aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a rule with an aggregating query only contain the source event fields that the {esql} query returns and new fields that the query creates.

Author: @vitaliidm based on your feedback [here](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/5182#discussion_r1600051394), I just want to double-check that the description of fields returned for aggregating queries is correct.

Reviewer: Technically, it's correct. Since most of fields any query returns are form source event.
But using source event fields might be too close to the case of non-aggr query and might lead to misunderstandings

I would try to simplify

> Aggregating queries use {ref}/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-agg-functions[`STATS...BY`] functions to aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by an {esql} rule with an aggregating query only contain the fields returned by the query, including new fields

Author: ```suggestion
Aggregating queries use {ref}/esql-functions-operators.html#esql-agg-functions[`STATS...BY`] functions to aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a rule with an aggregating query only contain the fields that the {esql} query returns and new fields that the query creates.
```

> NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index. For example...

Reviewer: example can be taken from here: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by

```
FROM employees
| STATS count = COUNT(emp_no) BY languages
| SORT languages

```

Here is a new column/field `count` is created

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with an aggregated value, the newly-added column is considered a new field. 
```

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Author: @vitaliidm I could use your help here. Is this how new ES| QL fields are created? Does ES|QL auto-create new fields if they don't currently exist in the query's source index?

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Author: Note to self: can remove the link to the STATS BY command in the note. There's already a link to the page in the para before the note.

```suggestion
NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the `STATS...BY` function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 
```

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Reviewer: Why we can't keep a link there? It is convenient to have it here.
Bu either way, I am fine with both

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Author: The paragraph before it contains a link to the docs for the `STATS BY` command, so I figured that'd be sufficient. 

<img width="600" alt="Screenshot 2024-05-16 at 9 40 23 AM" src="https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/assets/79124755/6170eaf6-ab9a-48ac-b223-10249de9178e">

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Author: @benironside I like some of the edits that you made, so I incorporated them below. Let me know if the revision works:

```suggestion
NOTE: A _new field_ is a field that doesn't exist in the query's source index and is instead created when the query runs. You can access new fields in the details of any alerts that are generated by the {esql} rule. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the query runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 
```

> NOTE: A _new field_ is a field that doesn't exist in the query's source index and is instead created when the rule runs. You can access new fields in the details of any alerts that are generated by the rule. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by[`STATS...BY`] function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the rule runs, and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: A _new field_ is a field that doesn't exist in the query's source index and is instead created when the rule runs. You can access new fields in the details of any alerts that are generated by the rule. For example, if you use the `STATS...BY` function to create a column with aggregated values, the column is created when the rule runs and is added as a new field to any alerts that are generated by the rule. 
```

[float]
[[esql-non-agg-query]]
===== Non-aggregating query 

> Non-aggregating queries don't use `STATS...BY` functions and don't aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a non-aggregating query contain source event fields that the query returns, new fields the query creates, and all other fields in the source event document. 

Reviewer: I would go with the first revision, since it says firstly fields from query + rest source fields.

And that is more correct, since if any field has duplicate name, the returned from query would have a priority. And only missing (rest of the source doc fields) will be merged into alert

> NOTE: New fields don't exist in the source index that the query is searching. Instead, they're created when the query runs, and you can access them in the details of any alerts that are generated. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-eval[`EVAL`] command to append new columns with calculated values, the columns are created when the query runs, and are added as new fields to any alerts generated by the rule.

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: A _new field_ is a field that doesn't exist in the query's source index and is instead created when the rule runs. You can access new fields in the details of any alerts that are generated by the rule. For example, if you use the {ref}/esql-commands.html#esql-eval[`EVAL`] command to append new columns with calculated values, the columns are created when the rule runs, and are added as new fields to any alerts generated by the rule.
```

[float]
[[esql-non-agg-query]]
===== Non-aggregating query 
Non-aggregating queries don't use `STATS...BY` functions and don't aggregate source event data. Alerts generated by a non-aggregating query contain source event fields that the query returns, new fields the query creates, and all other fields in the source event document. 

TIP: To improve the visibility of these fields while investigating alerts that the {esql} rule generates, add them to the rule's  <<rule-ui-advanced-params,custom highlighted fields>>. 

> NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: New fields are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index. For example fields created in [STATS..BY command](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/esql-commands.html#esql-stats-by) or  [eval command](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/esql-commands.html#esql-eval), etc
```

Reviewer: and for aggregating query - let's have an example with `STATS..BY`, that creates a new field

Author: Resolving this so we can continue this discussion on the latest version of this PR.

[float]
[[esql-rule-limitations]]
==== {esql} rule limitations 

> If your {esql} query creates new fields that aren’t part of the ECS schema, they won’t be mapped to the alerts index and you can't search or filter for them from the Alerts table. As a workaround, create <<runtime-fields,runtime fields>>. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your {esql} query creates new fields that aren’t part of the ECS schema, they aren't mapped to the alerts index so you can't search for or filter them in the Alerts table. As a workaround, create <<runtime-fields,runtime fields>>. 
```
"aren't... aren't... can't" seems better than "aren't... won't be... can't"

[float]

> [[esql-rule-limitations]]

Author: ```suggestion
[[custom-highlighted-esql-fields]]
```

==== Highlight fields returned by the {esql} rule query 

> When configuring an {esql} rule's **<<rule-ui-advanced-params,Custom highlighted fields>>**, you can specify any source event fields and new fields that the rule's aggregating or non-aggregating query returns. This can help ensure that returned fields are visible in the alert details flyout while you're investigating alerts.   

Reviewer: `source event fields` available only for non-aggr queries, but this sentence sounds like it available for both of them.

Author: Would a more general statement work?

```suggestion
When configuring an {esql} rule's **<<rule-ui-advanced-params,Custom highlighted fields>>**, you can specify any fields that the rule's aggregating or non-aggregating query returns. This can help ensure that returned fields are visible in the alert details flyout while you're investigating alerts.   
```

Reviewer: looks good!

The {esql} rule has the following limitations:

- If your {esql} query creates new fields that aren’t part of the ECS schema, they won’t be mapped to the alerts index and you can't search or filter for them from the Alerts table. As a workaround, create <<runtime-fields,runtime fields>>. 

> - New fields created by your query won't be displayed in the Highlighted fields section of the alert details flyout. To ensure they're visible while you're investigating alerts, add the new fields to the rule's  <<rule-ui-advanced-params,custom highlighted fields>>. 

Reviewer: I don't think we need this. This statement is applicable to any other rule and case. User won't see any field in highlighted section in alerts flyout, unless selects it in highlighted fields control.

Author: I thought every rule has a default set of relevant fields that display in the Highlighted fields section of the alert details flyout, and users can add to it as they like. Is that no longer the case?

Reviewer: Yes, some rule have. But this section is not about it. 
It is not limitation that newly created fields are not displayed in highlighted fields section by default.
That's true for any random field for any rule type. Unless user adds them specifically in Custom highlighted fields  controller, they won't be displayed in Highlighted fields section of the alert details flyout

Author: Ah, ok gotcha. You're saying that this section should only convey limitations that are specific to the ES|QL rule type, and that the Highlighted fields section works the way it does for all rule types, not just the ES|QL.

Since the Highlighted fields section functions the same for all rule types (i.e., it only shows a default set of relevant fields unless you specify additional fields), I wonder if it's necessary to highlight in the ES|QL rule docs that newly-created ES|QL fields can be selected as custom highlighted fields. We're documenting this change in the 8.14 release notes, and possibly the What's new page as well. What are your thoughts, @vitaliidm

Reviewer: Yes, we should highlight it. That was the main objective of the improvement: to  make these fields available to select in Custom highlighted fields component.

Reviewer: @nastasha-solomon, as discussed on a call - maybe we can just have a small section, that states: use can add to custom highlighted fields any filed returned by aggr/non-aggr queries(ref to them?), including newly created fields

Author: @vitaliidm would you mind checkign [c64371a](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/5182/commits/c64371a98f9a0d1ad2dfd723223b7699796b2a5c) and letting me know if it fits what you're suggesting?

> - New fields, which are fields that don't exist in the query’s source index, won't be displayed in the Highlighted fields section of the alert details flyout. To ensure they're visible while you're investigating alerts, add the new fields to the rule's  <<rule-ui-advanced-params,custom highlighted fields>>. 

Author: ```suggestion
- New fields created by your query won't be displayed in the Highlighted fields section of the alert details flyout. To ensure they're visible while you're investigating alerts, add the new fields to the rule's  <<rule-ui-advanced-params,custom highlighted fields>>. 
```
